




RULE NO. 1: Court Dimensions – Equipment | NBA Official





























Skip to content





Toggle navigation






NBA Official





Today’s Officials
Rules

2022-23 NBA Rulebook
NBA Video Rulebook


Officials

Today’s Officials
2022-23 NBA Officials
2022-23 Officials Guide
Officials Headshots
Officiating Opportunities


News

Latest News
Points of Emphasis
Last Two Minute Reports
Team Injury Reports
Collective Bargaining Agreement
CBA 101
NBA Constitution
Undergraduate Advisory Committee Guide


Replay Center

Replay Archive
Replay Triggers


NBA.com
 
Search for:




SEARCH

 








Rulebook Home >
            RULE NO. 1: Court Dimensions – Equipment        




Search for:






 
RULE NO. 1: Court Dimensions – Equipment
RULE NO. 2: Duties of the Officials
RULE NO 3: Players, Substitutes and Coaches
RULE NO. 4: Definitions
RULE NO. 5: Scoring and Timing
RULE NO. 6: Putting Ball in Play – Live/Dead Ball
RULE NO. 7: Shot Clock
RULE NO. 8: Out-of-Bounds and Throw-In
RULE NO. 9: Free Throws and Penalties
RULE NO. 10: Violations and Penalties
RULE NO. 11: Basket Interference – Goaltending
RULE NO. 12: Fouls and Penalties
RULE NO. 13: Instant Replay
RULE NO. 14 – Coaches Challenge
Comments on the Rules
 



RULE NO. 1: Court Dimensions – Equipment


Section I—Court and Dimensions

The playing court shall be measured and marked as shown in the court (See below)
A free throw lane shall be marked at each end of the court with dimensions and markings as shown on the court diagram.   All boundary lines are part of the lane; lane space marks and neutral zone marks are not. The areas identified by the lane space markings are 2” by 6” inches.
A free throw line shall be drawn (2” wide) across each of the circles indicated in the court diagram.  It shall be parallel to the end line and shall be 15’ from the plane of the face of the backboard.
The three-point field goal area has parallel lines 3’ from the sidelines, extending from the baseline and an arc of 23’9” from the middle of the basket which intersects the parallel lines.
Four hash marks shall be drawn (2” wide) perpendicular to the sideline on each side of the court and 28’ from the baseline.  These hash marks shall extend 3’ onto the court.
Two hash marks shall be drawn (2” wide) perpendicular to the baseline on each side of the free throw lane line. These hash marks shall be 3’ from the free throw lane line and extend 6” onto the court.
Four hash marks shall be drawn (2” wide) parallel to the baseline on each side of the free throw circle.  These hash marks shall be 13’ from the baseline and 3’ from the free throw lane lines and shall be 6” in length.
Two hash marks shall be drawn (2” wide) perpendicular to the sideline, in front of the scorer ’s table, and 4’ on each side of the midcourt line. This will designate the Substitution Box.
A Restricted Area shall be marked with a half-circle 4’ from the center of the basket ring and then parallel to the lane line to the face of the backboard with a solid two-inch line.

Section II—Equipment

The backboard shall be a rectangle measuring 6’ horizontally and 3 ½’ vertically. The front surface shall be flat and transparent.
A transparent backboard shall be marked with a 2” white rectangle centered behind the This rectangle shall have outside dimensions of 24” horizontally and 18” vertically.
Home management is required to have a spare board with supporting unit on hand for emergencies, and a steel tape or extension ruler and a level for use if necessary.
Each basket shall consist of a pressure-release NBA approved metal safety ring 18” in inside diameter with a white cord net 18” in length.  The cord of the net shall not be less than 30 thread nor more than 120 thread and shall be constructed to check the ball momentarily as it passes through the basket.
Each basket ring shall be securely attached to the backboard with its upper edge 10’ above and parallel to the floor and equidistant from the vertical edges of the board. The nearest point of the inside edge of the ring shall be 6” from the plane of the face of the The ring shall be painted orange.
(1) The ball shall be an officially approved NBA ball between 7 ½ and 8 ½ pounds pressure. (2) A minimum of nine balls must be made available to each team for pre-game warmup.
NBA arena backboards must contain four strips of red LED lights, synchronized with the game clock, outlining the inside of the four sides of the backboard to indicate the expiration of time and one strip of an amber LED light to indicate the expiration of the shot clock.













Today’s Officials
2022-23 NBA Officiating Staff
2022-23 Officials Guide
Last Two Minute Reports
L2M Reports FAQ
Officiating Opportunities
 

Team Injury Reports
@NBAOfficial
Replay Video Archive
Replay Triggers
2022-23 NBA Rulebook
Video Rulebook



NBA Constitution
Collective Bargaining Agreement
CBA 101
NBA Undergraduate Advisory Committee Guide
 





Copyright © 2023 NBA Media Ventures, LLC. All rights reserved. No portion of NBA.com
            may be duplicated, redistributed or manipulated in any form.
By accessing any information beyond this page, you agree to abide by the Privacy Policy / Your California Privacy Rights and Terms of Use.















