Big3 begins: Ice Cube's new 3-on-3 league starts with a bangYour inbox approves The power couples ⚾️ & 💰💰 🏈's best, via 📧For You U.S. Sports Entertainment Life Money Tech Travel OpinionONLY AT USA TODAY:Newsletters For Subscribers From the Archives Crossword eNewspaper Magazines      Investigations Weather Forecast Podcasts Video Humankind Just CuriousPets Food Reviewed      Coupons Blueprint Best Auto Insurance Best Pet Insurance Best Travel Insurance Best Credit Cards Best CD Rates Best Personal Loans Subscribe NBAIce CubeAdd TopicBig3 begins: Ice Cube's new 3-on-3 league starts with a bangAPView Comments NEW YORK (AP) — Allen Iverson plans to be more spectator than scorer in the Big3.The Iverson of old might be the only thing Ice Cube's new 3-on-3 basketball venture can't deliver.The rapper-actor's league of former NBA players got off to a strong start Sunday, with the first two games both decided on winning shots in front of 15,177 fans.Iverson's team won the third game, though as player-coach he only put himself in for 9 minutes. At 42 years old, the former NBA MVP said he doesn't expect to be playing heavy minutes in the 10-game season."But I think the best part about this game here tonight and all the other games, it was exciting all throughout," Iverson said. "It didn't need Allen Iverson the player, per se."Follow every game: Latest NBA Scores and SchedulesThe quality of play was spotty, as players had to shake off sometimes years of rust. But it was certainly competitive."I think it's going to be incredibly good. The games are exciting, the players are still talented and they're fun to watch," said Hall of Famer Clyde Drexler, who coached Power to a 62-58 victory over Tri State in the second game on DeShawn Stevenson's 3-pointer.Entertainers such as LL Cool J and NBA All-Star James Harden were in the crowd for the first two games before Iverson, the main attraction among players, took the court following a concert.He may be the biggest name in the league, but his role on the court will be minor."I signed up to be a coach, player and captain. Coach part is going to go on throughout the game," Iverson said. "Playing part is not going to be what you expect."You're not going to see the Allen Iverson of old out there."He can't be blamed, given the risk of injury for players way past their primes. Jason Williams, the flashy point guard nicknamed "White Chocolate," went down with a right leg injury late in the opener, and Corey Maggette had to come out of the second game. Both were expected to be OK.And that might not stop more players from wanting to play. Recently retired Paul Pierce was in the crowd and Andre Owens, the star of Iverson's 3's Company, said Kevin Garnett might want to play."Sky's the limit. Obviously you see the debut," Iverson said. "I didn't even expect it to be like this, and then obviously guys that's retired now, to see the outcome of this situation right here, probably are going to get that itch."Games are played to 60 points but teams have to win by two, and getting to 60 wasn't enough in either of the first two games.In the opener, Rashard Lewis made a three-point play with his team facing game point as 3 Headed Monsters edged Ghost Ballers 62-60.The game has gimmicks — Lewis made the first 4-point shot and teams had 14 seconds to shoot. Team names included 3's Company and Killer 3s and some players wore nicknames on their jerseys, with Jerome Williams going with "Junk Yard Dog" on his.PHOTOS: Best of Big 3Cube vowed the games would be competitive — players are vying for a revenue share based on final league standings. There was pushing and shoving in the post and a few hard fouls, and the physicality and trash talk appeared to heat up as the games went on. With hand checking allowed, the games looked nothing like today's NBA game."Some people like that style, some people don't," Trilogy's Kenyon Martin said. "So we're here to fill that void for the people that appreciate the way the game has been played forever, you know what I'm saying? Basketball is a contact sport."The eight-team league will play on 10 weekends, culminating with the Aug. 26 championship in Las Vegas. Games are shown on Monday nights on Fox Sports 1.3 HEADED MONSTERS 62, GHOST BALLERS 60The 3 Headed Monsters blew a late lead after Williams went down and the Ghost Ballers went ahead 60-59 before Lewis scored and drew a foul, making the free throw to finish the game.Lewis finished with 27 points and former No. 1 pick Kwame Brown had 17 points and 13 rebounds for the 3 Headed Monsters. Ricky Davis led the Ghost Ballers with 23 points.POWER 62, TRI STATE 58Stevenson finished with 20 points for the Power, making five 3-pointers. Maggette scored 15 and Cuttino Mobley had 14.Jermaine O'Neal scored 18 points for Tri State, coached by Hall of Famer Julius Erving. Mike James had 13 points and 12 rebounds.3'S COMPANY 61, BALL HOGS 51Andre Owens had 20 points and 15 rebounds for Iverson's team. DerMarr Johnson added 14 points and Al Thornton scored 13.Iverson finished 1 for 6 with two assists.Rasual Butler made six 3-pointers and scored 22 points for the Ball Hogs. Derrick Byars chipped in 19.TRILOGY 60, KILLER 3's 45Al Harrington scored 25 points as Trilogy cruised in the final game of the day. James White added 16.Reggie Evans scored 18 and Stephen Jackson 17 for the losers.View Comments Featured Weekly AdAbout Us Newsroom Staff Ethical Principles Request a Correction Press Releases Accessibility Sitemap Subscription Terms & Conditions Terms of Service Your California Privacy Rights/Privacy Policy Privacy PolicyDo Not Sell My Info/Cookie PolicyContact Us Help Center My Account Give Feedback Get Home Delivery eNewspaper USA TODAY Shop USA TODAY Print Editions Licensing & Reprints Advertise Careers Internships Support Local BusinessNews Tips Submitting letters to the editor Podcasts Newsletters Mobile Apps Facebook Twitter Instagram LinkedIn Pinterest YouTube Reddit Flipboard RSS10Best Reviewed Jobs Sports Weekly Studio Gannett USA TODAY Sports+ Classifieds Coupons Blueprint Auto Insurance Pet Insurance Travel Insurance Credit Cards Banking Personal Loans© 2023 USA TODAY, a division of Gannett Satellite Information Network, LLC.